Wikipedia :
Delhi ( National Capital Territory of India) is a metropolitan region in India. With a population of 22 million in 2011, it is the world's second most populous city 3 and the largest city in India in terms of area. 4 5 The NCT and its urban region have been given the special status of National Capital Region (NCR) under the Constitution of India's 69th amendment act of 1991. The NCR includes the neighbouring cities of Alwar, Baghpat, Gurgaon, Sonepat, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Noida, Greater Noida and other nearby towns, and has nearly 22.2 million residents. 6

A union territory, the political administration of the NCT of Delhi today more closely resembles that of a state of India, with its own legislature, high court and an executive council of ministers headed by a Chief Minister. New Delhi is jointly administered by the federal government of India and the local government of Delhi, and is the capital of the NCT of Delhi.

Delhi has been continuously inhabited since the 6th century BC. 7 Through most of its history, Delhi has served as a capital of various kingdoms and empires. It has been captured, ransacked and rebuilt several times, particularly during the medieval period, and the modern Delhi is a cluster of a number of cities spread across the metropolitan region. This is why Delhi is sometimes called the City of cities.

Delhi was the site of ancient Indraprastha (Khandavprastha), the mythical capital of the Pandavas during the Mahabharata. 8 Delhi re-emerged as a major political, cultural and commercial city along the trade routes between northwest India and the Gangetic plain during the Delhi sultanates. 9 10

In AD 1639, the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan built a new walled city named Shahjahanabad, in Delhi, which served as the capital of the Mughal Empire from 1649 until the Rebellion of 1857. 11 12 Shahjahanabad today is Old Delhi. The greater part of Old Delhi is still confined within the space of Shah Jahān’s walls, and several gates built during his rule—the Kashmiri Gate, the Delhi Gate, the Turkman Gate, and the Ajmeri Gate—still stand. In 1911 the British determined to shift the capital of India from Calcutta (Kolkata) to Delhi, and a three-member committee was formed to plan the construction of the new administrative center. The key architect on the committee was Sir Edwin Lutyens; 13 it was he who gave shape to the city. The British moved to the partially built New Delhi in 1912, and construction was completed in 1931. 14 A new capital city, New Delhi, was built to the south of the old city during the 1920s. 15 When the British left India in 1947, New Delhi became its national capital and seat of the union government.

There are a number of legends associated with the origin of the name Delhi. One is that it is derived from Dhillu or Dilu, a king who built a city at this location in 50 BC and named it after himself. 8 16 17 Another legend holds that the name of the city is based on the Hindi/Prakrit word dhili (loose) and that it was used by the Tomaras to refer to the city because the Iron Pillar of Delhi had a weak foundation and had to be moved. 17 The coins in circulation in the region under the Tomaras were called dehliwal. 18 According to the Bhavishya Purana, King Prithiviraja,of Indraprastha built a new fort in the modern-day Purana Qila area for the convenience of all four castes in his kingdom. He ordered the construction of a gateway to the fort and later named the fort dehali. 19 Some historians believe that the name is derived from Dilli, a corruption of dehleez or dehali—both terms meaning 'threshold' or 'gateway'—and symbolic of the city as a gateway to the Gangetic Plain. 20 21 Another theory suggests that the city's original name was Dhillika. 22

The people of Delhi are referred to as or Delhiites. 23 The city is referenced in various idioms of the Northern Indo-Aryan languages. Examples include:

The area around Delhi was probably inhabited before the second millennium BC, and there is evidence of continuous inhabitation since at least the 6th century BC. 7 The city is believed to be the site of Indraprastha, the legendary capital of the Pandavas in the Indian epic Mahabharata. 8 The earliest architectural relics date back to the Maurya period (c. 300 BC); in 1966, an inscription of the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka (273–236 BC) was discovered near Srinivaspuri. Remains of eight major cities have been discovered in Delhi. The first five cities were in the southern part of present-day Delhi. Anang Pal of the Tomara dynasty founded the city of Lal Kot in AD 736. The Chauhans conquered Lal Kot in 1180 and renamed it Qila Rai Pithora.

The king Prithviraj Chauhan was defeated in 1192 by the Afghan invader Muhammad Ghori who made a concerted effort to conquer northern India. 8 By 1200, Hindu resistance had begun to crumble. Dominance of Muslim dynasties in India was to last for the next five centuries. On the death of Muhammad in 1206, the Turkic slave-general, Qutb-ud-din Aibak, broke away from the Ghurid Dynasty and became the first Sultan of Delhi. He began construction of the Qutb Minar and Quwwat-al-Islam (might of Islam) mosque, the earliest extant mosque in India. Qutb-ud-din faced widespread Hindu rebellions and it was his successor, Iltutmish (1211–36), who consolidated the Muslim conquest of northern India. 8 29

For the next three hundred years, Delhi was ruled by a succession of Turkic and an Afghan, Lodhi dynasty. They built a number of forts and townships that are part of the seven cities of Delhi. 31 Delhi was a major centre of Sufism during this period. 32 The Mamluk Sultanate (Delhi) was overthrown in 1290 by the Khilji dynasty (1290–1320). Under the second Khilji ruler, Ala-ud-din Khilji, the Delhi sultanate extended its control south of the Narmada River in the Deccan. The Delhi sultanate reached its greatest extent during the reign of Muhammad bin Tughluq (1325–1351). In an attempt to bring the whole of the Deccan under control, he moved his capital to Daulatabad, Maharashtra in central India, but by moving away from Delhi he lost control of the north and was forced to return to Delhi to restore order. The southern provinces then broke away. In the years following the reign of Firoz Shah Tughlaq (1351–1388), the Delhi sultanate rapidly began to lose its hold over its northern provinces. Delhi was captured and sacked by Timur Lenk in 1398. 33 Near Delhi, Timur massacred 100,000 captives. 34 Delhi's decline continued under the Sayyid dynasty (1414–1451), until the sultanate was reduced to Delhi and its hinterland. Under the Afghan Lodhi dynasty (1451–1526), the Delhi sultanate recovered control of the Punjab and the Gangetic plain to once again achieve domination over northern India. However, the recovery was short-lived and in 1526 the sultanate was destroyed by Babur, founder of the Mughal dynasty.

In 1526, Babur, a descendant of Genghis Khan and Timur, from the Fergana Valley in modern-day Uzbekistan, invaded India, defeated the last Lodhi sultan in the First Battle of Panipat and founded the Mughal Empire that ruled from Delhi and Agra. 8 The Mughal dynasty ruled Delhi for more than three centuries, with a sixteen-year hiatus during the reign of Sher Shah Suri, from 1540 to 1556. 35 In 1553, the Hindu king, Hemu Vikramaditya acceded to the throne of Delhi by defeating forces of Mughal Emperor Humayun at Agra and Delhi. However, the Mughals re-established their rule after Akbar's army defeated Hemu during the Second Battle of Panipat in 1556. 36 37 38 Shah Jahan built the seventh city of Delhi that bears his name Shahjahanabad, which served as the capital of the Mughal Empire from 1638 and is today known as the Old City or Old Delhi. 39

After 1720, the Mughal Empire's influence declined rapidly as the Hindu Maratha Empire rose to prominence. 40 In 1737, Maratha forces sacked Delhi following their victory against the Mughals in the First Battle of Delhi. In 1739, the Mughal Empire lost the Battle of Karnal, following which the victorious forces of Nader Shah, the Turkic ruler of the Afsharid dynasty, invaded and looted Delhi, carrying away many treasures, including the Peacock Throne. 41 A treaty signed in 1752 made Marathas the protectors of the Mughal throne in Delhi. 42

In 1757, the Afghan ruler, Ahmad Shah Durrani, sacked Delhi. He returned to Afghanistan leaving a Mughal puppet ruler in nominal control. The Marathas again occupied Delhi in 1758, and were in control before their defeat in 1761 at the third battle of Panipat, and the city was captured again by Ahmad Shah. 44 However, in 1771, the Marathas established a protectorate over Delhi when the Maratha ruler, Mahadji Shinde, recaptured Delhi and the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II was installed as a puppet ruler in 1772. 45 In 1803, during the Second Anglo-Maratha War, the forces of British East India Company defeated the Maratha forces in the Battle of Delhi. 46 During the Indian Rebellion of 1857, Delhi fell to the forces of East India Company after a bloody fight known as the Siege of Delhi. The city came under the direct control of the British Government in 1858. It was made a district province of the Punjab. 8 In 1911, it was announced that the capital of British held territories in India was to be transferred from Calcutta to Delhi. 14 The name "New Delhi" was given in 1927, and the new capital was inaugurated on 13 February 1931. New Delhi, also known as Lutyens' Delhi, 47 was officially declared as the capital of the Union of India after the country gained independence on 15 August 1947. 48 During the partition of India, thousands of Hindu and Sikh refugees, mainly from West Punjab fled to Delhi, while many Muslim residents of the city migrated to Pakistan. Migration to Delhi from the rest of India continues (as of 2013), contributing more to the rise of Delhi's population than the birth rate, which is declining. 49

The Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 declared the Union Territory of Delhi to be formally known as the National Capital Territory of Delhi. 50 The Act gave Delhi its own legislative assembly along Civil lines, though with limited powers. 50 In December 2001, the Parliament of India building in New Delhi was attacked by armed militants, killing six security personnel. 51 India suspected Pakistan-based militant groups were behind the attack, which caused a major diplomatic crisis between the two countries. 52 There were further terrorist attacks in Delhi in October 2005 and September 2008, resulting in a total of 103 deaths. 53

Delhi is located at , and lies in Northern India. It borders the Indian states of Haryana on the north, west and south and Uttar Pradesh (UP) to the east. During the British Raj, Delhi was part of the province of Punjab and is still historically and culturally connected to the Punjab region. 54 Two prominent features of the geography of Delhi are the Yamuna flood plains and the Delhi ridge. The Yamuna river was the historical boundary between Punjab and UP, and its flood plains provide fertile alluvial soil suitable for agriculture but are prone to recurrent floods. The Yamuna, a sacred river in Hinduism, is the only major river flowing through Delhi. The Hindon River separates Ghaziabad from the eastern part of Delhi. The Delhi ridge originates from the Aravalli Range in the south and encircles the west, north-east and north-west parts of the city. It reaches a height of 318 m (1,043 ft) and is a dominant feature of the region. 55

The National Capital Territory of Delhi covers an area of 1,484 km2 (573 sq mi), of which 783 km2 (302 sq mi) is designated rural, and 700 km2 (270 sq mi) urban therefore making it the largest city in terms of area in the country. It has a length of 51.9 km (32 mi) and a width of 48.48 km (30 mi).

Delhi is included in India's seismic zone-IV, indicating its vulnerability to major earthquakes, but earthquakes have not been common in recent history. 56

Delhi features an atypical version of the humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cwa). The warm season lasts from 9 April to 8 July with an average daily high temperature above 36 °C (97 °F). The hottest day of the year is 22 May, with an average high of 38 °C (100 °F) and low of 25 °C (77 °F). 57 The cold season lasts from 11 December to 11 February with an average daily high temperature below 18 °C (64 °F). The coldest day of the year is 4 January, with an average low of 2 °C (36 °F) and high of 15 °C (59 °F). 57 In early March, the wind direction changes from north-westerly to south-westerly. From March to May the weather is hot. 58 The monsoon arrives at the end of June, along with an increase in humidity. 58 The brief, mild winter starts in late November, peaks in January and heavy fog often occurs. 59

Temperatures in Delhi usually range from 5 to 40 °C (41.0 to 104.0 °F), with the lowest and highest temperatures ever recorded being −6.7 and 45.3 °C (19.9 and 113.5 °F) respectively. 60 The annual mean temperature is 25 °C (77 °F); monthly mean temperatures range from 13 to 32 °C (55 to 90 °F). The highest temperature recorded in July was 45 °C (113 °F) in 1931. 61 62 The average annual rainfall is approximately 714 mm (28.1 in), most of which falls during the monsoon in July and August. 8 The average date of the advent of monsoon winds in Delhi is 29 June. 63

Delhi is one of the most polluted major cities in the world and according to one estimate, air pollution causes the death of about 10,500 people in Delhi every year. 64 65 66 During 2013-14, peak levels of fine particulate matter (PM) in Delhi increased by about 44%, primarily due to high vehicular and industrial emissions, construction work and crop burning in adjoining states. 64 67 68 69 Rising air pollution level has significantly increased lung-related ailments (especially asthma and lung cancer) among Delhi's children and women. 70 71 The dense smog in Delhi during winter season results in major air and rail traffic disruptions every year. 72 According to Indian meteorologists, the average maximum temperature in Delhi during winters has declined notably since 1998 due to rising air pollution. 73

Environmentalists have criticized the Delhi government for not doing enough to curb air pollution and to inform people about air quality issues. 65 Most of Delhi's residents are unaware of alarming levels of air pollution in the city and the health risks associated with it. 68 69 Since mid-1990s, Delhi has undertaken some measures to curb air pollution — Delhi has the third highest quantity of trees among Indian cities 74 and the Delhi Transport Corporation operates the world's largest fleet of environmentally-friendly compressed natural gas (CNG) buses. 75 In 1996, the Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) started a public interest litigation in the Supreme Court of India that ordered the conversion of Delhi's fleet of buses and taxis to run on CNG and banned the use of leaded petrol in 1998. In 2003, Delhi won the United States Department of Energy's first 'Clean Cities International Partner of the Year' award for its "bold efforts to curb air pollution and support alternative fuel initiatives". 75 The Delhi Metro has also been credited for significantly reducing air pollutants in the city. 76 However, according several authors, most of these gains have been lost, especially due to rise in vehicle numbers, the market share of diesel cars and a considerable decline in bus ridership. 77 78 The state government of adjoining Uttar Pradesh is considering imposing a ban on crop burning to reduce pollution in Delhi NCR and an environmental panel has appealed to India's Supreme Court to impose a 30% cess on diesel cars. 79 80

As of July 2007, the National Capital Territory of Delhi comprises nine districts, 27 tehsils, 59 census towns, 300 villages, 81 and three statutory towns, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) – 1,397.3 km2 or 540 sq mi, the New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) – 42.7 km2 or 16 sq mi and the Delhi Cantonment Board (DCB) – 43 km2 or 17 sq mi). 82 83 On 16 July 2012, the Delhi Government decided to increase the number of districts from nine to 11. 84

The Delhi metropolitan area lies within the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT), which has five local municipal corporations; North Delhi Municipal Corporation, South Delhi Municipal Corporation, East Delhi Municipal Corporation, NDMC and DCB. The former MCD was divided into three smaller Municipal Corporations – North Delhi, South Delhi and East Delhi. 85 According to the 2011 census, MCD is among the largest municipal bodies in the world, providing civic services to about 11 million people. 86

Delhi houses the Supreme Court of India, and the regional Delhi High Court, along with the Small Causes Court for civil cases; the Magistrate Court and the Sessions Court for criminal cases, has jurisdiction over Delhi. The city is administratively divided into eleven police-zones, which are subdivided into 95 local police stations. 87

The National Capital Territory of Delhi has its own Legislative Assembly, Lieutenant Governor, council of ministers and Chief Minister. Members of the legislative assembly are directly elected from territorial constituencies in the NCT. The legislative assembly was abolished in 1956, after which direct federal control was implemented until it was re-established in 1993. The Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) handles civic administration for the city as part of the Panchayati Raj Act. The Government of India and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi jointly administer New Delhi, where both bodies are located. The Parliament of India, the Rashtrapati Bhavan (Presidential Palace), Cabinet Secretariat and the Supreme Court of India are located in the municipal district of New Delhi. There are 70 assembly constituencies and seven Lok Sabha (Indian parliament's lower house) constituencies in Delhi. 88 89

The Indian National Congress (Congress) formed all the governments in Delhi until the 1990s, when the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), led by Madan Lal Khurana, came to power. 90 In 1998, the Congress returned to power under the leadership of Sheila Dikshit, who was subsequently re-elected for 4 consecutive terms. But in 2013, the Congress was ousted from power, with the newly formed Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) led by anti-corruption crusader Arvind Kejriwal forming the government with outside support from the Congress. 91 However, that government was short-lived, collapsing only after 46 days. 92 Currently, Delhi is under President's rule. 93

Delhi is the largest commercial centre in northern India; it has an estimated net State Domestic Product (FY 2010) of 1578.17 billion (US$26 billion) in nominal terms and ~ 6300 billion (US$110 billion) in PPP terms. 94 As of 2013, the per capita income of Delhi was Rs.210000, highest in India. GSDP in Delhi at the current prices for 2012-13 is estimated at Rs 3.66 lakh crore against Rs 3.11 lakh crore in 2011-12. 95

As per the Economic survey of Delhi (2005–2006), the tertiary sector contributes 70.95% of Delhi's gross SDP followed by secondary and primary sectors, with 25.20% and 3.85% contributions respectively. 96 Delhi's workforce constitutes 32.82% of the population, and increased by 52.52% between 1991 and 2001. 97 Delhi's unemployment rate decreased from 12.57% in 1999–2000 to 4.63% in 2003. 97 In December 2004, 636,000 people were registered with various employment exchange programs in Delhi. 97 In 2001 the total workforce in national and state governments and the quasi-government sector was 620,000, and the private sector employed 219,000. 97 Key service industries are information technology, telecommunications, hotels, banking, media and tourism. 98 Construction, power, health and community services, and real estate are also important to the city's economy. Delhi has one of India's largest and fastest growing retail industries. 99 Manufacturing also grew considerably as consumer goods companies established manufacturing units and headquarters in the city. Delhi's large consumer market and the availability of skilled labour has attracted foreign investment. In 2001, the manufacturing sector employed 1,440,000 workers and the city had 129,000 industrial units. 100

Delhi's municipal water supply is managed by the Delhi Jal Board (DJB). As of 2005–06, it supplied 650 million gallons per day (MGD), whereas the estimated consumption requirement is 963 MGD. 101 The shortfall is met by private and public tube wells and hand pumps. At 240 MGD, the Bhakra storage is DJB's largest water source, followed by the Yamuna and Ganges rivers. Delhi's groundwater level is falling and its population density is increasing, so residents often encounter acute water shortage. 101 

 In Delhi, daily domestic solid waste production is 8000 tonnes which is dumped at three landfill locations by MCD. 102 The daily domestic waste water production is 470 MGD and industrial waste water is 70 MGD. 103 A large portion of the sewage flows untreated into the Yamuna river. 103

The city's electricity consumption is about 1,265 kWh per capita, but actual demand is higher. 104 In Delhi power distribution is managed by Tata Power Distribution and BSES Rajdhani since 2002. The Delhi Fire Service runs 43 fire stations that attend about 15,000 fire and rescue calls per year. 105 The state-owned Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) and private enterprises Vodafone, Airtel, Idea cellular, Reliance Infocomm, Aircel and Tata Docomo provide telephone and cell phone service to the city. Cellular coverage is available in GSM, CDMA, 3G and 4G.

Indira Gandhi International Airport, situated to the southwest of Delhi, is the main gateway for the city's domestic and international civilian air traffic. In 2012-13, the airport was used by more than 35 million passengers, 108 109 making it one of the busiest airports in South Asia. Terminal 3, which cost 96.8 billion (US$1.6 billion) to construct between 2007 and 2010, handles an additional 37 million passengers annually. 110

The Delhi Flying Club, established in 1928 with two de Havilland Moth aircraft named Delhi and Roshanara, was based at Safdarjung Airport which started operations in 1929, when it was the Delhi's only airport and the second in India. 111 The airport functioned until 2001, however in January 2002 the government closed the airport for flying activities because of security concerns following the New York attacks in September 2001. Since then, the club only carries out aircraft maintenance courses, 111 and is used for helicopter rides to Indira Gandhi International Airport for VIP including the president and the prime minister. 112

A second airport open for commercial flights has been suggested, by expansion of Meerut Airport or construction of a new airport in Greater Noida. 113

Delhi is a major junction in the Indian railway network and is the headquarters of the Northern Railway. The six main railway stations are New Delhi railway station, Old Delhi, Nizamuddin Railway Station, Anand Vihar Railway Terminal and Sarai Rohilla. 114 The Delhi Metro, a mass rapid transit system built and operated by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), serves many parts of Delhi and the neighbouring cities Gurgaon, Noida and Ghaziabad. As of August 2011, the metro consists of six operational lines with a total length of 189 km (117 mi) and 146 stations, and several other lines are under construction. 115 The Phase-I was built at a cost of US$2.3 billion and the Phase-II was expected to cost an additional 216 billion (US$3.6 billion). 116 Phase-II has a total length of 128 km and was completed by 2010. 117 Delhi Metro completed 10 years of operation on 25 December 2012. It carries millions of passengers every day. 118 In addition to the Delhi Metro, a suburban railway, the Delhi Suburban Railway exists. 119

The Delhi Metro is a rapid transit system serving Delhi, Gurgaon, Faridabad, Noida, and Ghaziabad in the National Capital Region of India. Delhi Metro is the world's 13th largest metro system in terms of length. Delhi Metro is India's first modern public transportation system, which has revolutionized travel by providing a fast, reliable, safe, and comfortable means of transport. The network consists of six lines with a total length of 189.63 kilometres (117.83 miles) with 142 stations, of which 35 are underground, five are at-grade, and the remainder are elevated. All stations have escalators, elevators, and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains. It has a combination of elevated, at-grade, and underground lines, and uses both broad gauge and standard gauge rolling stock. Four types of rolling stock are used: Mitsubishi-ROTEM Broad gauge, Bombardier MOVIA, Mitsubishi-ROTEM Standard gauge, and CAF Beasain Standard gauge.

Delhi Metro is being built and operated by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited (DMRC), a state-owned company with equal equity participation from Government of India and Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. However, the organisation is under administrative control of Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. Besides construction and operation of Delhi metro, DMRC is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail, monorail and high-speed rail projects in India and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad. The Delhi Metro project was spearheaded by Padma Vibhushan E. Sreedharan, the Managing Director of DMRC and popularly known as the "Metro Man" of India. He famously resigned from DMRC, taking moral responsibility for a metro bridge collapse which took five lives. Sreedharan was awarded with the prestigious Legion of Honour by the French Government for his contribution to Delhi Metro.

The 08 RRTS Corridors have been proposed by National Capital Region Planning Board to facilitate the people travelling from nearby cities in NCR to Delhi. The three main corridors in first phase are as follows which are expected to become operational before 2019:

Remaining five corridors are also approved by National Capital Region Planning Board but are planned in the second phase.

As of 2007, private vehicles account for 30% of the total demand for transport. 114 Delhi has 1922.32 km of road length per 100 km2, one of the highest road densities in India. 114 It is connected to other parts of India by five National Highways: NH 1, 2, 8, 10 and 24. The city's road network is maintained by MCD, NDMC, Delhi Cantonment Board, Public Works Department (PWD) and Delhi Development Authority. 120 The Delhi-Gurgaon Expressway connects Delhi with Gurgaon and the international airport. "The Delhi-Faridabad Skyway". connects Delhi with the neighbouring industrial town of Faridabad. The DND Flyway and Noida-Greater Noida Expressway connect Delhi with the suburbs of Noida and Greater Noida. 121 122 Delhi's rapid rate of economic development and population growth has resulted in an increasing demand for transport, creating excessive pressure on the city's transport infrastructure. As of 2008, the number of vehicles in the metropolitan region, Delhi NCR, is 11.2 million (11.2 million). 123 In 2008, there were 85 cars in Delhi for every 1,000 of its residents. 124

In order to meet the transport demand, the State and Union government constructed a mass rapid transit system, including the Delhi Metro. 114 In 1998, the Supreme Court of India ordered that all public transport vehicles in Delhi must be fuelled by compressed natural gas (CNG). 125 Buses are the most popular means of public transport, catering for about 60% of the total demand. 114 The state-owned Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) is a major bus service provider which operates the world's largest fleet of CNG-fuelled buses. 126 Delhi Bus Rapid Transit System runs between Ambedkar Nagar and Delhi Gate.

According to the 2011 census of India, the population of Delhi is 16,753,235. 1 The corresponding population density was 11,297 persons per km2, with a sex ratio of 866 women per 1000 men, and a literacy rate of 86.34%. In 2004, the birth rate, death rate and infant mortality rate per 1000 population were 20.03, 5.59 and 13.08, respectively. 127 In 2001, the population of Delhi increased by 285,000 as a result of migration and by 215,000 as a result of natural population growth 127  – this made Delhi one of the fastest growing cities in the world. By 2015, Delhi is expected to be the third-largest conurbation in the world after Tokyo and Mumbai. 128 Dwarka Sub City, Asia's largest planned residential area, is located within the National Capital Territory of Delhi. 129

Hinduism is Delhi's majority religion, with approximately 82.7% of Delhi's population. The city has large communities of Muslims (10%), Sikhs (5%), Baha'i (0.1%), Jains (1.1%) and Christians (0.94%). 131 132 Other minority religions include Buddhism, Zoroastrianism and Judaism. 133 Punjabi & Hindi/Urdu are the official and widely spoken languages in Delhi. 134 Hindi/Urdu/Punjabi in Devanagari Script or Gurmukhi Script & English are the principal written languages of the city. 135 There is a sizeable Punjabi and Urdu speaking population. Punjabi and Urdu have official second language status in Delhi. 136

According a 1999–2000 estimate, the total number of people living below the poverty line, defined as living on US$11 or less per month, in Delhi was 1,149,000, or 8.23% of the total population, compared to 27.5% of India as a whole. 137 52% of Delhi residents live in slums 138 without basic services like water, electricity, sanitation, sewage system or proper housing. 139 140 In 2005, Delhi accounted for the highest percentage (16.2%) of the crimes reported in 35 Indian cities with populations of one million or more. 141 The city has the highest rate of kidnapping and abduction cases with 9.3%; the national rate is 2.2%. 142 Delhi accounts for 15.4% of crime against women in Indian cities. 142

Delhi's culture has been influenced by its lengthy history and historic association as the capital of India. This is exemplified by many significant monuments in the city. The Archaeological Survey of India recognises 1200 heritage buildings 143 and 175 monuments as national heritage sites. 144 In the Old City, the Mughals and the Turkic rulers constructed several architecturally significant buildings, such as the Jama Masjid – India's largest mosque 145 and the Red Fort. Three World Heritage Sites – the Red Fort, Qutab Minar and Humayun's Tomb – are located in Delhi. 146 Other monuments include the India Gate, the Jantar Mantar – an 18th-century astronomical observatory – and the Purana Qila – a 16th-century fortress. The Laxminarayan temple, Akshardham temple, the Bahá'í Lotus temple and the ISKCON temple are examples of modern architecture. Raj Ghat and associated memorials houses memorials of Mahatma Gandhi and other notable personalities. New Delhi houses several government buildings and official residences reminiscent of British colonial architecture, including the Rashtrapati Bhavan, the Secretariat, Rajpath, the Parliament of India and Vijay Chowk. Safdarjung's Tomb is an example of the Mughal gardens style. Some regal havelis (palatial residences) are in the Old City. 147

Lotus Temple, is a Bahá'í House of Worship completed in 1986. Notable for its flowerlike shape, it serves as the Mother Temple of the Indian subcontinent and has become a prominent attraction in the city. The Lotus Temple has won numerous architectural awards and been featured in hundreds of newspaper and magazine articles. Like all other Bahá'í Houses of Worship, is open to all regardless of religion, or any other distinction, as emphasized in Bahá'í texts. The Bahá'í laws emphasize that the spirit of the House of Worship be that it is a gathering place where people of all religions may worship God without denominational restrictions. 148 The Bahá'í laws also stipulate that only the holy scriptures of the Bahá'í Faith and other religions can be read or chanted inside in any language; while readings and prayers can be set to music by choirs, no musical instruments can be played inside. Furthermore no sermons can be delivered, and there can be no ritualistic ceremonies practiced. 148

Chandni Chowk, a 17th-century market, is one of the most popular shopping areas in Delhi for jewellery and Zari saris. 149 Delhi's arts and crafts include, Zardozi 150  – an embroidery done with gold thread – 151 and Meenakari 152  – the art of enamelling. 153

Delhi's association and geographic proximity to the capital, New Delhi, has amplified the importance of national events and holidays like Republic Day, Independence Day (15 August) and Gandhi Jayanti. On Independence Day, the Prime Minister addresses the nation from the Red Fort. Most Delhiites celebrate the day by flying kites, which are considered a symbol of freedom. 154 The Republic Day Parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India's cultural diversity and military strength. 155 156 Over the centuries, Delhi has become known for its composite culture, and a festival that symbolises this is the Phool Walon Ki Sair, which takes place in September. Flowers and pankhe – fans embroidered with flowers – are offered to the shrine of 13th century Sufi saint Khwaja Bakhtiyar Kaki and the Yogmaya temple, both situated in Mehrauli. 157

Religious festivals include Diwali (the festival of lights), Mahavir Jayanti, Guru Nanak's Birthday, Durga Puja, Holi, Lohri, Chauth, Krishna Janmastami, Maha Shivratri, Eid ul-Fitr, Moharram and Buddha Jayanti. 156 The Qutub Festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over India are showcased at night, with the Qutub Minar as a backdrop. 158 Other events such as Kite Flying Festival, International Mango Festival and Vasant Panchami (the Spring Festival) are held every year in Delhi. The Auto Expo, Asia's largest auto show, 159 is held in Delhi biennially. The World Book Fair, held biannually at the Pragati Maidan, is the second largest exhibition of books in the world. 160 Delhi is often regarded as the "Book Capital" of India because of high readership. 161

As India's national capital and centuries old Mughal capital, Delhi influenced the food habits of its residents and is where Mughlai cuisine originated. Along with Indian cuisine, a variety of international cuisines are popular among the residents. 162 The dearth of food habits among the city's residents created a unique style of cooking which became popular throughout the world, with dishes such as Kebab, biryani, tandoori. The city's classic dishes include Butter chicken, Aloo Chaat, chaat, dahi vada, kachori,chole bhature, jalebi and lassi. 162 163 :40–50, 189–196

The fast living habits of Delhi's people has motivated the growth of street food outlets. 163 :41 A trend of dining at local dhabas is popular among the residents. High profile restaurants have gained popularity in recent years, among the popular restaurants are the Karim Hotel, the Punjab Grill and Bukhara. 164 The Gali Paranthe Wali (the street of fried bread) is a street in Chandni Chowk particularly for food eateries since the 1870s. Almost the entire street is occupied by fast food stalls or street vendors. It has nearly become a tradition that almost every prime minister of India has visited the street to eat paratha at least once. However, other Indian cuisines are also available in this area. 163 :40–50 165

Private schools in Delhi – which use either English or Hindi as the language of instruction – are affiliated to one of three administering bodies, the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE), the Central Board for Secondary Education (NCERT (CBSE)) 167 or the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS). In 2004–05, approximately 15.29 lakh (1.529 million) students were enrolled in primary schools, 8.22 lakh (0.822 million) in middle schools and 6.69 lakh (0.669 million) in secondary schools across Delhi. 168 Female students represented 49% of the total enrolment. The same year, the Delhi government spent between 1.58% and 1.95% of its gross state domestic product on education. 168

Schools and higher educational institutions in Delhi are administered either by the Directorate of Education, the NCT government or private organisations. In 2006, Delhi had 165 colleges, five medical colleges and eight engineering colleges, 168 seven major universities and nine deemed universities. 168 Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi Technological University, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University and National Law University are the only state universities, 170 Indira Gandhi National Open University is for distance education and the rest are central universities. 171 As of 2008, about 16% of all Delhi residents possessed at least a college graduate degree. 172

As the capital of India, Delhi is the focus of political reportage, including regular television broadcasts of Parliament sessions. Many national media agencies, including the state-owned Press Trust of India, Media Trust of India and Doordarshan, is based in the city. Television programming includes two free terrestrial television channels offered by Doordarshan, and several Hindi, English and regional-language cable channels offered by multi system operators. Satellite television has yet to gain a large quantity of subscribers in the city. 173

Print journalism remains a popular news medium in Delhi. The city's Hindi newspapers include Navbharat Times, Hindustan Dainik, Punjab Kesari, Pavitra Bharat, Dainik Jagran, Dainik Bhaskar and Dainik Desbandhu. 174 Amongst the English language newspapers, The Hindustan Times, with a daily circulation of over a million copies, is the single largest daily. 175 Other major English newspapers include Times of India, The Hindu, Indian Express, Business Standard, The Pioneer and The Asian Age. Regional language newspapers include the Malayalam daily Malayala Manorama and the Tamil dailies Dinamalar and Dinakaran. 174

Radio is a less popular mass medium in Delhi, although FM radio has gained popularity 176 since the inauguration of several new stations in 2006. 177 A number of state-owned and private radio stations broadcast from Delhi. 178 179

Delhi has hosted many major international sporting events, including the first and also the ninth Asian Games, 180 the 2010 Hockey World Cup, the 2010 Commonwealth Games and the 2011 Cricket World Cup. Delhi lost bidding for the 2014 Asian Games, 181 and considered making a bid for the 2020 Summer Olympics. 182 However, sports minister Manohar Singh Gill later stated that funding infrastructure would come before a 2020 bid. 183

The 2010 Commonwealth Games, which ran from 3 to 14 October 2010, was one of the largest sports event held in India. 184 185 The opening ceremony of the 2010 Commonwealth Games was held at the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, the main stadium of the event, in New Delhi at 7:00 pm Indian Standard Time on 3 October 2010. 186 The ceremony featured over 8,000 performers and lasted for two and a half hours. 187 It is estimated that 3.5 billion (US$58 million) were spent to produce the ceremony. 188 Events took place at 12 competition venues. 20 training venues were used in the Games, including seven venues within Delhi University. 189 The rugby stadium in Delhi University North Campus hosted rugby games for Commonwealth Games. 189 190 The mess left behind after the Commonwealth Games prompted Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to replace Sports and Youth Affairs minister Manohar Singh Gill with Ajay Maken in the 19 January 2011 Cabinet reshuffle. 191

Cricket and football are the most popular sports in Delhi. 192 There are several cricket grounds, or maidans, located across the city. The Feroz Shah Kotla Ground (known commonly as the Kotla) is one of the oldest cricket grounds in India and is a venue for international cricket matches. It is the home ground of the Delhi cricket team, which represents the city in the Ranji Trophy, the premier Indian domestic first-class cricket championship. 193 The Delhi cricket team has produced several world-class international cricketers such as Virender Sehwag, Gautam Gambhir, Virat Kohli, Madan Lal, Chetan Chauhan and Bishan Singh Bedi to name a few. The Railways and Services cricket teams in the Ranji Trophy also play their home matches in Delhi, in the Karnail Singh Stadium and the Harbax Singh Stadium respectively. The city is also home to the Indian Premier League team Delhi Daredevils, who play their home matches at the Kotla, and was the home to the Delhi Giants team (previously Delhi Jets) of the now defunct Indian Cricket League.

Ambedkar Stadium, a football stadium in Delhi which holds 21,000 people, was the venue for the Indian football team's World Cup qualifier against UAE on 28 July 2012. 194 Delhi hosted the Nehru Cup in 2007 195 and 2009, in both of which India defeated Syria 1–0. 196 In the Elite Football League of India, Delhi's first professional American football franchise, the Delhi Defenders played its first season in Pune. 197 Buddh International Circuit in Greater Noida, a suburb of Delhi, hosts the annual Formula 1 Indian Grand Prix. 198 The Indira Gandhi Arena is also in Delhi.

Delhi is a member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21.


Citizendium :
New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase-1 enzyme confers bacterial resistance to antibiotics of the carbepenem class, often considered "last resort" drugs for multidrug resistant bacteria.[1] The gene to manufacture it can be horizontally transferred among different species of pathogenic bacteria. In September 2010, news media have been reporting bacteria with this resistance as a new "superbug".

Organisms that produce the enzyme are resistant to virtually all beta-lactam antibiotics except aztreonam. [2] These organisms often are also resistant to fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides.

First reported in Klebsiella pneumoniae, it has been reported in Acinetobacter, Escherichia coli, Citrobacter freundii, Enterobacter cloacae, and Morganella morganii. A number of cases have been found in Britain, Canada and the US in patients that went to India for medical procedures or were treated for emergencies while in India.[3]

"For all acute care facilities, the Centers for Disease Control and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) recommend an aggressive infection control strategy, including managing all patients with carbepenem-resistant enterobacteriacease (CRE) using contact precautions and implementing Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines for detection of carbapenemase production. In areas where CRE are not endemic, acute care facilities should

In areas where CRE are endemic, an increased likelihood exists for importation of CRE, and facilities should consider additional strategies to reduce rates of CRE. Acute care facilities should review these recommendations and implement appropriate strategies to limit the spread of these pathogens. " [4]

Antibiotics to be considered in treatment include tigecycline, colistin, polymyxin B, and aztreonam, as well as combination therapy.[1]

The Indian health ministry has disputed the conclusion of the August 2010 Lancet study that the gene originated in India, describing this conclusion as "unfair" and stating that Indian hospitals are perfectly safe for treatment.[5][6] Indian politicians have described linking this new drug resistance gene to India as "malicious propaganda" and blamed multinational corporations for what they describe as selective malignancy.[5][7] A Bharatiya Janata Party politician has instead argued that the journal article is bogus and represented an attempt to scare medical tourists away from India.[8] The Indian Ministry of Health released a statement "strongly refut[ing]" naming the enzyme "New Delhi".[9] A co-author of the 2010 Lancet study, who is based in the University of Madras, has stated that he does not agree with the part of the article that advises people to avoid elective surgeries in India.[10]

In contrast, an editorial in the March 2010 issue of the Journal of Association of Physicians of India blamed the emergence of this gene on the widespread misuse of antibiotics in the Indian healthcare system, stating that Indian doctors have "not yet taken the issue of antibiotic resistance seriously" and noting little control over the prescription of antibiotics by doctors and even pharmacists.[11] The Times of India states that there is general agreement among experts that India needs both an improved policy to control the use of antibiotics and a central registry of antibiotic-resistant infections.[10]

The British Journal 'The Lancet' refused to publish rebuttal from Indian National Centre for Disease Control, claiming lack of space and that editors' decision was that it was better placed elsewhere.[12]

On 12 January 2011, the editor of The Lancet, Richard Horton, apologized and acknowledged that naming a superbug after New Delhi was an “error”.[13] Following this, Ajai R. Singh, editor of Mens Sana Monographs, demanded that such 'geographic names giving' be abandoned and replaced by 'scientific names giving'. He proposed changing NDM-1 to PCM Plasmid-encoding Carbapenem-resistant Metallo-beta-Lactamase.[14]


Britannica :
Delhi is of great historical significance as an important commercial, transport, and cultural hub, as well as the political centre of India. According to legend, the city was named for Raja Dhilu, a king who reigned in the region in the 1st century bce. The names by which the city has been known—including Delhi, Dehli, Dilli, and Dhilli, among others—likely are corruptions of his name. Area Old Delhi, 360 square miles (932 square km); national capital territory, 573 square miles (1,483 square km). Pop. Old Delhi, (2001) 12,260,000; national capital territory, (2001) 13,850,507; Old Delhi, (2011) 11,007,835; national capital territory, (2011) 16,753,235.

Delhi ,  city and national capital territory, north-central India . The city of Delhi actually consists of two components: Old Delhi, in the north, the historic city; and New Delhi , in the south, since 1947 the capital of India, built in the first part of the 20th century as the capital of British India. One of the country’s largest urban agglomerations, Delhi sits astride (but primarily on the west bank of) the Yamuna River , a tributary of the Ganges (Ganga) River, about 100 miles (160 km) south of the Himalayas . The national capital territory embraces Old and New Delhi and the surrounding metropolitan region, as well as adjacent rural areas. To the east the territory is bounded by the state of Uttar Pradesh , and to the north, west, and south it is bounded by the state of Haryana .

Delhi has been the centre of a succession of mighty empires and powerful kingdoms. Numerous ruins scattered throughout the territory offer a constant reminder of the area’s history. Popular lore holds that the city changed its locality a total of seven times between 3000 bce and the 17th century ce, although some authorities, who take smaller towns and strongholds into account, claim it changed its site as many as 15 times. All the earlier locations of Delhi fall within a triangular area of about 70 square miles (180 square km), commonly called the Delhi Triangle. Two sides of the triangle are articulated by the rocky hills of the —one to the south of the city, the other on its western edge, where it is known as the Delhi Ridge. The third side of the triangle is formed by the shifting channel of the . Between the river and the hills lie broad alluvial plains; the elevation of the territory ranges from about 700 to 1,000 feet (200 to 300 metres). The ridges and hillsides of the national capital territory abound in thorny trees, such as acacias, as well as seasonal herbaceous species. The sissoo (shisham; ) tree, which yields a dark brown and durable timber, is commonly found in the plains. Riverine vegetation, consisting of weeds and grass, occurs on the banks of the Yamuna. New Delhi is known for its flowering shade trees, such as the neem (Azadirachta indica; a drought-resistant tree with a pale yellow fruit), jaman (Syzygium cumini; a tree with an edible grapelike fruit), mango, pipal (Ficus religiosa; a fig tree), and sissoo. It also is known for its flowering plants, which include a large number of multicoloured seasonals: chrysanthemums, phlox, violas, and verbenas. The animal life of the national capital territory, like its plant life, is quite diverse. Among carnivorous animals are leopards, hyenas, foxes, wolves, and jackals, which inhabit the ravine lands and hilly ridges. Wild boars are sometimes spotted along the banks of the Yamuna. Monkeys are found in the city, especially around some of the temples and historical ruins. Birdlife is profuse; year-round species include pigeons, sparrows, kites, parrots, partridges, bush quail, and, on the ridges, peafowl. The lakes around the city attract seasonal species. Fish are plentiful in the Yamuna, and an occasional crocodile also may be found there.

The climate of Delhi is characterized by extreme dryness, with intensely hot summers. It is associated with a general prevalence of continental air, which moves in from the west or northwest, except during the season of the , when an easterly to southeasterly influx of oceanic air brings and increased humidity. The summer season lasts from mid-March to the end of June, with maximum temperatures typically reaching about 100 °F (about 37 °C) and minimum temperatures falling into the high 70s F (about 25 °C); it is characterized by frequent thunderstorms and squalls, especially in April and May. The season normally begins in July and continues until the end of September. It is during these months that Delhi receives the bulk of its rainfall—roughly 23 inches (600 mm), or nearly three-fourths of the annual average. October and November constitute a transition period from monsoon to winter conditions. The dry winter season extends from late November to mid-March. The coldest month is January, with high temperatures in the low 70s F (about 21 °C) and low temperatures in the mid-40s F (about 7 °C).

The city plan of Delhi is a mixture of old and new road patterns. The street network of Old Delhi reflects the defense needs of an earlier era, with a few transverse streets leading from one major gate to another. Occasionally a street from a subsidiary gate leads directly to the main axes, but most Old Delhi streets tend to be irregular in direction, length, and width. Narrow and winding paths, culs-de-sac, alleys, and byways form an intricate matrix that renders much of Old Delhi accessible only to pedestrian traffic. Conversely, the Civil Lines (residential areas originally built by the British for senior officers) in the north and New Delhi in the south embody an element of relative openness, characterized by green grass, trees, and a sense of order. When the decision was made in 1911 to transfer the capital of British India from Calcutta (now ) to Delhi, a planning committee was formed, and a site 3 miles (5 km) south of the existing city of Delhi, around Raisina Hill, was chosen for the new administrative centre. A well-drained, healthy area between the Delhi Ridge and the , it provided ample room for expansion. Raisina Hill, commanding a view of the entire area, stood about 50 feet (15 metres) above the plain, but the top 20 feet (6 metres) were blasted off to make a level plateau for the major government buildings and to fill in depressions. With this low acropolis as the focus, the plan for New Delhi was laid out. The New Delhi plan was characterized by wide straight avenues, with trees in double rows on either side, that connected various points of interest and provided vistas of the surrounding area. The most prominent feature of the plan, aside from its diagonal road pattern, was the Rajpath, a broad central avenue that in present-day New Delhi stretches westward from the National Stadium, through the All India War Memorial arch (popularly called the India Gate), to the Central Secretariat buildings and the (Rashtrapati Bhavan). This is the main east-west axis; it divides New Delhi into two parts, with a large shopping and business district, Connaught Place, in the north and extensive residential areas in the south.


random :
initiator baud prison circle firearm weapon chairperson caution breasts survey laser benefits discoveries utilities laces preliminaries examinations decay injection party payment macros band marble reservoir conflict chairmen parities presents troubleshooter breast amusements binders shoes hoops winches gallons staff computer vector adverbs punishments multimeter jets mines overalls straps custody occasion cover barges award percent alloys abuses noon valve elapse cone cases hertz armories creeks vine helm litres diagonals mission snows court washer versions difference reader capacitance intelligences furnaces bends legs motors ears confinements sight strap apprehension jug airport math desks flange compromises thumb merchants compounds pens runoff eighths today tills ear note debris anchors transistors chart siren mate expenditures trousers relays tops polisher sound cheats application pound schoolrooms feather tones tanks fruits armors child results woods sponges total benefit leaper duties summary odds lung bowl railroads analogs names gunpowder fears programmer surpluses touch adjective budgets pointers confessions hint conferences artillery capacities limitation buzz post cheeses structures gyro countermeasure complement relocations samples dot paws noses bracing independence poles tips ball counts dope chaplains surfaces stone title attribute developments terrains crystal piece tractors capstans heads schoolhouses stock methodology excess throttles gravel hierarchies pan voltage scratches exchanger initiators overlays swamp bread milestone dock shafts davits heights rinse cloth hyphens altitudes chests armory reels claw telecommunications warranties emitters legislation stubs forearms trash number shells transmittal hushes details subjects remedies peacetime asterisks root score members claps breeze release limitations discounts intakes changes freights technique exchanges conjectures plastic deduction rivers conn shouts tracks rails friend call boost reasons theory texts incline generations safeguards fogs rudders groom retractor reinforcement curls glues wools tan gyros alleys recesses microphones weld salvages gloves patrols administrator photographs recombinations routine characters splices receiver backup roller daughters runner industries engines memory mill pyramid allowance witnesses pumps gum rim rockets passenger safeguard differences resistances centimeters tear cliff pints rope arrow geography patients blood dawn tower gross guide accusations rumbles gold wreck straighteners heaps ventilation dose rollouts accordance tabulation exterior torques watches car reactors operabilities fireball kilograms saddles requirement storms seals leaf dissipation decoder oil violations hardcopy gaps cable gages civilians training hierarchy camera taxes conjunctions fumes sinks groan airs perforators abuser growth rag perforator arrivals nuts saturday desires sonar rheostat speeders tailors dissemination advancement day additive steamers rings multiplex splitters profile blink drink shop pushdowns swimmers doorknobs games rooms arguments accesses afternoon reveille pulse cargoes fighter development separations cape addressees container buckles buffer vicinity misfits route publication alignment linkages whip springs waterline items gyroscope waxes electron accessory vices yarn circuit pilot presences deal interpreters whirl apportionment bend boats warehouse ore sheet keel markets ratios look sacks lids motels option spot shadows use desertion gulf smashes rinses egg leaves drift hump mustard mountain drop sirs checks hours howl status supplies humans soils neutrons waists settings cuts floats buy fakes mop process index break departure meetings digits console slopes diagnoses dominions preservers passage paste lapses iron item nameplate press headers future approvals clicks help housing embosses modifications liberties enlistment energizer comb clip offer nests importance locomotive transportation hundreds warfare stress automation mixes


