Wikipedia :



Citizendium :
New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase-1 enzyme confers bacterial resistance to antibiotics of the carbepenem class, often considered "last resort" drugs for multidrug resistant bacteria.[1] The gene to manufacture it can be horizontally transferred among different species of pathogenic bacteria. In September 2010, news media have been reporting bacteria with this resistance as a new "superbug".

Organisms that produce the enzyme are resistant to virtually all beta-lactam antibiotics except aztreonam. [2] These organisms often are also resistant to fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides.

First reported in Klebsiella pneumoniae, it has been reported in Acinetobacter, Escherichia coli, Citrobacter freundii, Enterobacter cloacae, and Morganella morganii. A number of cases have been found in Britain, Canada and the US in patients that went to India for medical procedures or were treated for emergencies while in India.[3]

"For all acute care facilities, the Centers for Disease Control and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) recommend an aggressive infection control strategy, including managing all patients with carbepenem-resistant enterobacteriacease (CRE) using contact precautions and implementing Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines for detection of carbapenemase production. In areas where CRE are not endemic, acute care facilities should

In areas where CRE are endemic, an increased likelihood exists for importation of CRE, and facilities should consider additional strategies to reduce rates of CRE. Acute care facilities should review these recommendations and implement appropriate strategies to limit the spread of these pathogens. " [4]

Antibiotics to be considered in treatment include tigecycline, colistin, polymyxin B, and aztreonam, as well as combination therapy.[1]

The Indian health ministry has disputed the conclusion of the August 2010 Lancet study that the gene originated in India, describing this conclusion as "unfair" and stating that Indian hospitals are perfectly safe for treatment.[5][6] Indian politicians have described linking this new drug resistance gene to India as "malicious propaganda" and blamed multinational corporations for what they describe as selective malignancy.[5][7] A Bharatiya Janata Party politician has instead argued that the journal article is bogus and represented an attempt to scare medical tourists away from India.[8] The Indian Ministry of Health released a statement "strongly refut[ing]" naming the enzyme "New Delhi".[9] A co-author of the 2010 Lancet study, who is based in the University of Madras, has stated that he does not agree with the part of the article that advises people to avoid elective surgeries in India.[10]

In contrast, an editorial in the March 2010 issue of the Journal of Association of Physicians of India blamed the emergence of this gene on the widespread misuse of antibiotics in the Indian healthcare system, stating that Indian doctors have "not yet taken the issue of antibiotic resistance seriously" and noting little control over the prescription of antibiotics by doctors and even pharmacists.[11] The Times of India states that there is general agreement among experts that India needs both an improved policy to control the use of antibiotics and a central registry of antibiotic-resistant infections.[10]

The British Journal 'The Lancet' refused to publish rebuttal from Indian National Centre for Disease Control, claiming lack of space and that editors' decision was that it was better placed elsewhere.[12]

On 12 January 2011, the editor of The Lancet, Richard Horton, apologized and acknowledged that naming a superbug after New Delhi was an “error”.[13] Following this, Ajai R. Singh, editor of Mens Sana Monographs, demanded that such 'geographic names giving' be abandoned and replaced by 'scientific names giving'. He proposed changing NDM-1 to PCM Plasmid-encoding Carbapenem-resistant Metallo-beta-Lactamase.[14]


Britannica :
Delhi is of great historical significance as an important commercial, transport, and cultural hub, as well as the political centre of India. According to legend, the city was named for Raja Dhilu, a king who reigned in the region in the 1st century bce. The names by which the city has been known—including Delhi, Dehli, Dilli, and Dhilli, among others—likely are corruptions of his name. Area Old Delhi, 360 square miles (932 square km); national capital territory, 573 square miles (1,483 square km). Pop. Old Delhi, (2001) 12,260,000; national capital territory, (2001) 13,850,507; Old Delhi, (2011) 11,007,835; national capital territory, (2011) 16,753,235.

Delhi ,  city and national capital territory, north-central India . The city of Delhi actually consists of two components: Old Delhi, in the north, the historic city; and New Delhi , in the south, since 1947 the capital of India, built in the first part of the 20th century as the capital of British India. One of the country’s largest urban agglomerations, Delhi sits astride (but primarily on the west bank of) the Yamuna River , a tributary of the Ganges (Ganga) River, about 100 miles (160 km) south of the Himalayas . The national capital territory embraces Old and New Delhi and the surrounding metropolitan region, as well as adjacent rural areas. To the east the territory is bounded by the state of Uttar Pradesh , and to the north, west, and south it is bounded by the state of Haryana .

Delhi has been the centre of a succession of mighty empires and powerful kingdoms. Numerous ruins scattered throughout the territory offer a constant reminder of the area’s history. Popular lore holds that the city changed its locality a total of seven times between 3000 bce and the 17th century ce, although some authorities, who take smaller towns and strongholds into account, claim it changed its site as many as 15 times. All the earlier locations of Delhi fall within a triangular area of about 70 square miles (180 square km), commonly called the Delhi Triangle. Two sides of the triangle are articulated by the rocky hills of the —one to the south of the city, the other on its western edge, where it is known as the Delhi Ridge. The third side of the triangle is formed by the shifting channel of the . Between the river and the hills lie broad alluvial plains; the elevation of the territory ranges from about 700 to 1,000 feet (200 to 300 metres). The ridges and hillsides of the national capital territory abound in thorny trees, such as acacias, as well as seasonal herbaceous species. The sissoo (shisham; ) tree, which yields a dark brown and durable timber, is commonly found in the plains. Riverine vegetation, consisting of weeds and grass, occurs on the banks of the Yamuna. New Delhi is known for its flowering shade trees, such as the neem (Azadirachta indica; a drought-resistant tree with a pale yellow fruit), jaman (Syzygium cumini; a tree with an edible grapelike fruit), mango, pipal (Ficus religiosa; a fig tree), and sissoo. It also is known for its flowering plants, which include a large number of multicoloured seasonals: chrysanthemums, phlox, violas, and verbenas. The animal life of the national capital territory, like its plant life, is quite diverse. Among carnivorous animals are leopards, hyenas, foxes, wolves, and jackals, which inhabit the ravine lands and hilly ridges. Wild boars are sometimes spotted along the banks of the Yamuna. Monkeys are found in the city, especially around some of the temples and historical ruins. Birdlife is profuse; year-round species include pigeons, sparrows, kites, parrots, partridges, bush quail, and, on the ridges, peafowl. The lakes around the city attract seasonal species. Fish are plentiful in the Yamuna, and an occasional crocodile also may be found there.

The climate of Delhi is characterized by extreme dryness, with intensely hot summers. It is associated with a general prevalence of continental air, which moves in from the west or northwest, except during the season of the , when an easterly to southeasterly influx of oceanic air brings and increased humidity. The summer season lasts from mid-March to the end of June, with maximum temperatures typically reaching about 100 °F (about 37 °C) and minimum temperatures falling into the high 70s F (about 25 °C); it is characterized by frequent thunderstorms and squalls, especially in April and May. The season normally begins in July and continues until the end of September. It is during these months that Delhi receives the bulk of its rainfall—roughly 23 inches (600 mm), or nearly three-fourths of the annual average. October and November constitute a transition period from monsoon to winter conditions. The dry winter season extends from late November to mid-March. The coldest month is January, with high temperatures in the low 70s F (about 21 °C) and low temperatures in the mid-40s F (about 7 °C).

The city plan of Delhi is a mixture of old and new road patterns. The street network of Old Delhi reflects the defense needs of an earlier era, with a few transverse streets leading from one major gate to another. Occasionally a street from a subsidiary gate leads directly to the main axes, but most Old Delhi streets tend to be irregular in direction, length, and width. Narrow and winding paths, culs-de-sac, alleys, and byways form an intricate matrix that renders much of Old Delhi accessible only to pedestrian traffic. Conversely, the Civil Lines (residential areas originally built by the British for senior officers) in the north and New Delhi in the south embody an element of relative openness, characterized by green grass, trees, and a sense of order. When the decision was made in 1911 to transfer the capital of British India from Calcutta (now ) to Delhi, a planning committee was formed, and a site 3 miles (5 km) south of the existing city of Delhi, around Raisina Hill, was chosen for the new administrative centre. A well-drained, healthy area between the Delhi Ridge and the , it provided ample room for expansion. Raisina Hill, commanding a view of the entire area, stood about 50 feet (15 metres) above the plain, but the top 20 feet (6 metres) were blasted off to make a level plateau for the major government buildings and to fill in depressions. With this low acropolis as the focus, the plan for New Delhi was laid out. The New Delhi plan was characterized by wide straight avenues, with trees in double rows on either side, that connected various points of interest and provided vistas of the surrounding area. The most prominent feature of the plan, aside from its diagonal road pattern, was the Rajpath, a broad central avenue that in present-day New Delhi stretches westward from the National Stadium, through the All India War Memorial arch (popularly called the India Gate), to the Central Secretariat buildings and the (Rashtrapati Bhavan). This is the main east-west axis; it divides New Delhi into two parts, with a large shopping and business district, Connaught Place, in the north and extensive residential areas in the south.


random :
blots being paragraphs


